## Part A: Downloading data to AWS

1. Data description

We will download several types of data:
- a human reference genome
- a set of Illumina reads
- the same set of reads but pre-aligned

To illustrate that download speeds are really fast on AWS, we chose to create our instance on the us-west-2 region, which happens to be the same region where the T2T human genome is hosted (https://github.com/marbl/CHM13).

So, specifically, we will retrieve:
- the CHM13v2 genome assembly v1.1
- Illumina PCR-free reads generated by T2T from CHM13
- the alignment BAM file of those reads using BWA mem

Why CHM13v1.1 and not v2.0, you ask? It's because at the time of writing, the alignment BAM files and many other analyses are available for v1.1 but not v2.

2. S3

S3 is the name of the storage service/protocol used by Amazon. Amazon uses a lot of terminology for its services. A S3 'repository' is called a bucket. 

You can think of a S3 bucket as someone's Dropbox with a special command-line tool to access it. Some buckets are public, some are private, and you can imagine in both cases that permissions are set so that buckets can be either read-only or read-write by everyone. Of course, the T2T buckets are read-only for us. 

A particular aspect of S3 is that you may sometimes need a AWS account to download data if it is non-public. Yet, by default the S3 command-line tool always wants you to sign in to your account. We'll avoid that by passing the ```--no-sign-request``` argument.

3. Downloading the data

We'll get the data from https://github.com/marbl/CHM13.

Go to your instance and create a folder.

    mkdir data && cd data

Check that you have enough space:

    df -h .
    
Which should print:

    Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
    /dev/nvme0n1p1   30G  1,6G   29G   6% /

Download CHM13 v1.1:

    aws s3 --no-sign-request cp s3://human-pangenomics/T2T/CHM13/assemblies/chm13.draft_v1.1.fasta.gz .

Download (a portion of) PCRfree reads:

      aws s3 --no-sign-request cp s3://human-pangenomics/T2T/CHM13/10x/CHM13_prep5_S13_L002_R1_001.fastq.gz .
      aws s3 --no-sign-request cp s3://human-pangenomics/T2T/CHM13/10x/CHM13_prep5_S13_L002_R2_001.fastq.gz .

While download happens, make a note of the download speed.

4. Comparing download speeds

Try downloading the Illumina reads using wget instead of S3:

    wget https://s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/human-pangenomics/T2T/CHM13/assemblies/chm13.draft_v1.1.fasta.gz
    
What do you notice?

5. Getting aligned reads

To see what the next bioinformatics steps would be, let us get BWA MEM and (attempt to) align the reads.

    wget https://anaconda.org/bioconda/bwa/0.7.17/download/linux-64/bwa-0.7.17-h7132678_9.tar.bz2
    tar xf bwa-0.7.17-h7132678_9.tar.bz2
    
But we cannot align immediately, we need to index the genome first.

    bin/bwa index chm13.draft_v1.1.fasta.gz
    
Already this step takes much time (a few dozens of minutes at least), so we'll skip ahead and download the alignment directoy:

    aws s3 --no-sign-request cp s3://human-pangenomics/T2T/CHM13/assemblies/alignments/chm13.draft_v1.1.pcrfree.bam .
